Early on in the first introductory overview lecture, of course, I had intimated that arbitrage was

going to be one of the main pricing techniques that we were going to use.

And I said that it was going to be especially important for pricing derivatives.

I deferred a little bit at the time on giving a really, really explaining what arbitrage meant.

I promise that, you know, when we really needed it, I was going to going to give you a precise mathematical

definition of arbitrage.

Well, that time has come.

We need it now.

So it's time for me to fulfill that promise.

So that's what we're going to do in this course topic.

That's what we're going to do in this lecture.

The topic.

Of this lecture is going to be arbitrage.

OK.

Really cannot be overstated how how important the concept of arbitrage is for for derivative pricing.

And for finance, you know, in finance in general.

It's it's really going to be the conceptual center of gravity of really are our entire development of

derivative pricing, and it's well worth making an effort to really deeply understand the concept of

arbitrage and be prepared to be prepared to spend a little bit of time on it.

It's it's unlikely.

Well, of course, you might be a lot smarter than me, but certainly it's probably not certainly for

me.

I couldn't expect I couldn't hope to have a full understanding of this concept just by watching one

lecture.

Arbitrage is the kind of thing that you develop an understanding of over time.

You've got to see it applied to to solve real problems.

You've got to apply it yourself.

It's got to just sit in your head for sort of a long enough period of time.

And over time you you start to internalize it and, you know, start to really, really grok it.

And ultimately, you have a real deep understanding of it.

That's that's the kind of thing arbitrage is.

But it's well worth it.

So.

Be prepared to think more this concept over for a little while to really have an internalized, solid

understanding of it because because you need it for the subject.

OK, I'm going to get to the precise mathematical definition later on in this lecture, but to start

off with, I want to.

Want to talk about it sort of at first in a sort of intuitive conceptual level, first for an idea as

important as this, it's it's worth it to take the time to to sort of understand it at a at an intuitive

level first.

So.

There's a few different ways to express what arbitrage really means.

OK, I'm going to write down a couple of them.

So here's one way of writing of expressing what a what an arbitrage is.

One way to say it is that it is a riskless profit.

OK, we'll often see people refer to arbitrages that way or.

Or claim that they have an arbitrage when they've when they've produced a riskless profit.

OK, so that, you know, that sounds that sounds like kind of a nice thing, right?

Riskless profit, a chance to make money, profit and riskless implies that there's no chance whatsoever

of losing money.

So an opportunity to make money with no chance whatsoever of losing money.

Sounds like a pretty good thing, right?

Sounds like arbitrages, you know, wouldn't be bad to have a few arbitrages in your life.

So that's one way of of expressing what an arbitrages restless profit.

Let me write down a.

A more detailed way of saying it's.

OK, so a little bit more more detailed.

Way of articulating what an arbitrage is, arbitrage is an investment opportunity, so.

An investment.

Investment opportunity in which.

Which you can you can make money if there's a probable there's a positive chance of making money.

There is a.

Positive chance or positive probability, a positive chance.

Of profiting.

OK, so there's a chance of making money.

And no chance whatsoever of losing money.

OK.

So here's a here's a here's a more here's really just a longer way of saying what I wrote down before

a riskless profit, an investment for which there's a positive chance or a positive probability that

you will make money in the investment and probabilities.

Zero, that you're going to lose any money at all.

OK.

That's that's that's the general idea of what what an arbitrage is.

Now, I think that arbitrage there is some understanding of this concept and of this word, of this

word arbitrage in in the wider world, I think.

I think there's a there's a popular understanding of what arbitrage of what arbitrage is.

In fact, I think that there was even a movie or something.

I seem to remember sometime in the last few years, there was a movie called Arbitrage or that arbitrage

in the title, I think some kind of movie about Wall Street or something.

There is an there is a there is a vernacular understanding in the wider world of of the concept of arbitrage.

And I think that that that common understanding is actually not too far from the understanding that

it has in the understanding that we have it in financial circles.

So here's a here's a simple example of an arbitrage, which I think is maybe what sort of the common

understanding of an arbitrage?

I think this kind of expresses the common understanding of what an arbitrage is.

Think of the foreign exchange markets.

Think of, say, the euro USD exchange rate.

Now, let's suppose that euros are trading for USD in, say, London.

Let's say that in London, euros are trading for USD for a dollar 20 per euro.

Let's say in New York, they're trading for a dollar 25 per year.

Let's just say that at some point in time, at the same time, we have those two situations happening

in London.

A euro costs a dollar twenty.

In New York, a euro costs a dollar twenty five.

Then as long as that situation persists, you can make unlimited amounts of money by buying euros in

London and selling them in New York.

You can just mint money as long as that situation persists.

And there is there's no chance whatsoever that you're going to lose money because, you know, you're

just buying euros for a dollar 20 in London and selling them for a dollar 25 in in New York.

And you're making a five cent profit on on every euro can't possibly lose as long as that situation

persists.

That's that's a it's a simple example of an arbitrage arbitrage is a much more subtle concept than that,

and there are much more complicated arbitrages than that.

But that does capture the the main idea pretty well.

Now, in quantitative finance and in derivative pricing in particular, the basic view that we're going

to have of of arbitragers is that they do not exist.

OK, now.

Arbitrage in in reality, in real world and in real markets, arbitrage is do in fact exist situations,

something like what I just described, maybe not quite as glaringly obvious as that, but things along,

you know, same basic idea.

Such things do exist in real markets in the real world.

So saying that we assume that arbitrages don't exist, that that is not a it's not a realistic or a

faithful description of of reality.

OK, so to understand what I mean when I say we assume arbitrages don't exist, I wanted to make a reference

to the way arbitragers are thought about in economic theory.

This is something that the field of quantitative finance, this is an idea that quantitative finance

borrows from economic theory, even though we don't usually think of quantitative finance as being really

a subfield of economics.

But, you know, clearly there are going to be some linkages with economics.

Obviously, there are related field.

So there's a way here's the way economists think about arbitragers.

The basic view of arbitrage in economics is that while arbitrage does certainly exist, I mean, they

do exist in the real world.

So economic theory is mandated to confront the fact that they exist and account for them in some way.

But the view in economics of arbitragers is that they are not an equilibrium phenomenon.

They are a non equilibrium phenomenon as far as economic theory is concerned.

Now, so the thing that, you know, the basic reason for that is, is the following arbitrage arbitrage

is while they certainly do exist in real markets and they do, they will pop up arbitrages, will pop

up into existence in real markets.

But they are they're transient phenomena.

They're very short lived phenomena, because as soon as an arbitrage pops up in a market, in some markets

somewhere, what's going to happen?

I mean, just think about what an arbitragers an arbitrage is an opportunity to restlessly make money.

Markets are full of people, traders and market participants generally who are, you know, why are

they in the markets that are in the markets to make money?

They get an opportunity to make money without risk.

Obviously, they're going to jump on it immediately.

And then that's what that is, what is going to happen.

It's what does happened when arbitrages pop up in markets in the real world.

So, for instance, the Euro USD example, what's going to happen if if there was a discrepancy between

the price of euros in in London, in New York, like what we described?

Well, as soon as that as soon as that discrepancy appears, people people trading in the markets are

going to jump on it and they're going to carry out exactly the procedure, more or less that I just

described.

You're going to start buying euros in London and selling euros in New York.

And what that's going to do is it's going to drive up the price of euros in London, drive down the

price of euros in New York until the two prices come together in the two markets.

And, you know, the arbitrage is going to be gone once the once the two prices have equalized in the

in the two markets.

That's what happens when arbitrage does appear in real markets.

Then they're a temporary phenomenon.

They are not stable.

And so the view of arbitrages in economic theory is that while they do certainly exist.

In economic theory, arbitrages are regarded as a non equilibrium phenomenon.

They are not something that can exist in a situation of economic equilibrium.

There arbitrage appears and it's a it's like a disturbance of equilibrium.

But as soon as an arbitrage appears, the forces that maintain equilibrium that the equilibrating forces

are going to kick in are not going to drive drive markets back into equilibrium.

And and, you know, the arbitrage is going to disappear, as, you know, any equilibrium sort of by

by the whole definition of the concept.

There are forces that are maintaining equilibrium, that drive the economy back into equilibrium when

it gets disturbed away from it.

So that's the view of arbitrage in economic theory, non equilibrium phenomenon, not something that

can exist in equilibrium.

In in quantitative finance and in derivative pricing, we regard the pricing of derivatives as something

that happens in a in an environment of economic equilibrium, where we're trying to we're trying to

calculate prices for derivatives and we're intending these to be stable things, things that exist in

equilibrium.

And so.

If the view of economic, you know, we borrow from economists, the idea that the precept that arbitrage

do not exist in equilibrium, and so since we regard derivative pricing as an equilibrium activity,

we will we will use we'll use the precept that arbitrage is do not exist as a as a basic axiom.

And we'll use it when we'll use that axiom, the non-existence of arbitrage in any time it's useful

to us in the task of pricing derivatives, the way that that concept, the way that the axiom of non-existence

of arbitrage is is usually going to get used for pricing derivatives is we're going to have a situation

where we can see that, you know, we're going to have two assets.

One of them is going to be a derivative, and then one of them is going to be other assets.

Probably the underlying is going to be, you know, one of the are going to be at least one of the other

assets involved in the the second asset might be a portfolio of different assets.

But basically we're going to have two assets and we're going to be able to demonstrate that the only

way that those two assets could have a different price from each other would be if there were an arbitrage,

there'd have to be an arbiter, an arbitrage opportunity between the two assets if they did not have

the same price.

And so therefore, invoking the axiom that arbitrage does not exist will be able to conclude that the

two prices have to be the same, that the two assets have to have the same price that is more or less

the basic way in which derivative pricing is going to work.