The payoffs of any derivative contract are the revenues that will be received by parties to the contract

from the contract, all value in a derivative contract ultimately flows from its payoffs.

Therefore, the payoffs are of critical and fundamental importance to being able to value any derivative

contract.

In this lecture, we're going to explicitly present the payoffs for forward contracts for either the

long or the short counterparty.

So generally, when we when for any derivative, when we talk about the payoff, we're talking about

the revenue that will be received from for any counterparty for forward contracts, neither the long

nor the short receive any payment from the contract until its expiration.

But at expiration, the payoff to either party equals whatever the value of the forward contract is

to them at at the expiration date.

In other words, the value of either the long or the short position in the forward contract at expiration

is equal to the long or the short payoff respectively.

In other words, at expiration, which is the only time that either counterparty in a forward contract

is going to receive any payoff.

The value of the forward contract is just whatever the payoff is going to be to either counterparty.

All value in the forward contract derives from its pay off, which means its its value at expiration.

So in order to value a forward contract at any time in its life, the first thing we need to do is value

it at the expiration date.

Now we will write down the notation that we're going to be using for forward contracts throughout the

entire course, as today is going to, as usual, is going to denote the underlying asset.

That's going to be our usual notation for the underlying asset, for any derivative contract.

So for forwards, Ezzati will be the price of the underlying asset at time.

T will denote the forward price for a forward contract that expires at time, towel by case subtable.

Generally, the expiration date itself is going to be denoted by a capital T. Which means most of the

time when we're talking about the forward price, we're going to actually be denoted by case.

Some Capital T. R. will be the risk free rate.

The T capital V is going to be the value of the long forward position at time, little T..

And so with that notation now, we're going to start by considering V of Capital T, meaning the value

of the forward contract, the value of the long position in the forward contract at its expiration date.

And that's the same thing as the long forward payoff.

Now, we asked, what are the cash flows that the long position in a forward receives and pays at the

expiration of of a forward contract, the expiration date, the underlying is transferred from the short

to the long, the long who's who's the buyer in the forward contract he receives the underlying asset

from the short so long is going to receive an asset whose value is X of Capital T..

We'll think of that as a cash flow, in essence, even though what it actually is generally is, is

the actual tangible asset itself.

Of course, the long has the has the privilege to at that time turn around and sell it on the market.

So for all intents and purposes, that Long is receiving massive capital T from the short at the expiration

of the forward contract.

In return, though, for receiving the the underlying asset, the long has got to pay, the short long

has to pay, the short the forward price case.

Sebti, which therefore has to be deducted from the value received to work out what the total cash flows

received by the long in the forward contract are.

So here we have a diagram, as is similar to the diagram that we wrote down earlier for the cash flows

that the two parties and a bond would enjoy.

So here we have each counterparty in a forward contract is represented by a box.

The long is the box on the left, the short is the box on the right.

And we just written in a diagram, diagrammatic form, what we just described in words at the expiration

date of the forward contract.

The long has to pay the forward price case some T to the short, but in return the long receives the

underlying asset which is worth S of capital T at the expiration date capital T, so therefore the long

forward pay off is equal to what the long receives, the value of the underlying asset, minus what

the long has to pay the forward price.

And that is just S of T minus K sometimes that's just that pay off, which is the forward payoff at

expiration.

That's just directly what's exemplified by this picture long receives as of Capital T and pays Kasib

T so that the total payoff for the long is S of T minus K subtheme.

And same thing now for the short just just the opposite, the short just received the payoff for the

short is just the exact opposite of the exact negative of the payoff for the long.

So it's the same picture we just now are looking at it from the point of view of the short, the short

receives the forward price case some tea, but has to provide along with the assets so effectively has

to pay along an asset worth of capital T..

So that means that the payoff to the short is case up to what the short receives, minus assumptive,

what the short has to pay to the long.

And it's the same thing as minus V of T minus the long payoff.

Now, what is extremely useful thing to do and which we're going to need for future purposes is to.

Is to graph those two payoffs on a certain in a certain kind of graph, in a certain kind of a certain

kind of Cartesian plane.

OK.

So what we want to do now is we want to plot both of the payoff's.

The payoff's.

And in general, with derivatives, when you're trying to analyze and understand derivatives, plotting

the payoffs, plotting graphs of the payoffs is a very useful thing to do for understanding what's going

on.

So.

You want to get in the habit of doing this.

So here is a here is a Cartesian plane.

Here is a Cartesian plane, the horizontal axis.

The horizontal axis is going to actually be the value of the underlying asset at the expiration, so

the horizontal axis corresponds to essive capital T..

OK, as of Capital T., we're going to be plotting the value of the two payoff's of the long and the

short payoffs of the forward contract.

And so what we're doing here is we're taking our two payoff's essive T minus Katie and Katie, minus

S of T, and we're plotting those functions as we're plotting the graphs of those functions as functions

of S of Capital T..

OK, now let's just think about let's think about that.

Let's first of all, the short I'm sorry, first of all, the long payoff.

What's the long payoff?

Long payoff is essive T minus K, subtheme S of T minus K simply.

What kind of a function is that as a function of S of T.

S of T minus qty.

That is just a linear function.

So its graph is going to be a straight line as a function of S of T, it's going to be a straight line.

It has slope one and if it's S of T minus qty, it's going to pass through the point, Katie, on the

horizontal axis.

OK, so.

Let that be the point.

Let that be the point.

Case up to.

On the axis.

It's going to be the case of on the S&P axis.

Now we want to plot the two payoff's the long payoff and the short payoff.

So long pay off as Essive T minus K Sebti again, that's a straight line of slope, one that passes

through the point case of T, so that is going to look like this.

OK, that is a graph of of the that is the graph of.

S of T minus K, sub T.

That's that's that's just the that's just the.

The payoff to the forward position, OK?

And now how about the long payoff, the long payoff with a long payoff is just CTY minus S of T. It's

exactly as we noted before, it's exactly minus the long payoff.

So if we want to graph the short payoff on the on this plane, it's just going to be the the minus of

the long payoff, which means all we have to do is reflect that line around about the the amount of

taxes to get the to get the short payoff.

But we could also just directly just look at it.

The short payoff is k t minus 15 k t.

Minus S of T.

On this plane is a straight line of slope, minus one that also passes through case of T on the horizontal

axis.

So that's going to look like this.

Like that, OK?

That is a case of T minus T.

And so those two curves that we just plotted in this plane where the horizontal axis is as of T, we

have just plotted graphs of the two payoff's.

So that is equal to the long.

Pay off.

The blue line is the long payoff is a plot of the long payoff, the red line is a plot of the short

payoff.

OK.

So.

In this particular case, you know, these aren't particularly complicated functions, they're just

straight lines, they're just linear functions.

So there's, you know, not not necessarily the most interesting, interesting thing on Earth, but

is still very valuable.

You know, the first step in understanding a derivative contract is very frequently understanding the

payoff at the expiration of the contract.

And so the first, you know, in trying to understand what's going on with the forward contract, very

useful to have these curves, these plots in your head.

The other thing is that we're going to be doing more with these with these graphs in future work.

In particular, when we are looking at options, which is the next product we're going to consider,

we're going to be coming back and making use of these plots there as well.

So it's very good to have plots like this and they're very useful.

And we will be as we go forward, we'll be continuing to use them.

OK, but anyway, so what we've done here is we've.

Accounted for the payoff, we've accounted for the value of the forward contract at its expiration date

because the payoff that a party receives at expiration is exactly the value of the contract to him.

So these these functions that we've considered a T minus K or K, T minus S of T, those actually represent

the value of the forward contract at expiration to either party.

The next step is going to be to back out from that what the value of a forward contract should be at

any earlier time, all the way back to its origination.